CIP-0189? | Variable Deposits as Pledge (#1204)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-0189/README.md

---
CIP: 189
Title: Variable Deposits as Pledge
Category: Ledger
Status: Proposed
Authors:
    - Ryan Wiley <rian222@gmail.com>
Implementors: []
Discussions:
    - Original PR: https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/1204
Created: 2026-05-31
License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

> Cardano currently treats stake pool pledge as a declared value rather than ADA that is directly locked as pledge. This creates operational confusion between "declared pledge" and "live pledge", requires a separate owner-stake satisfaction check, and allows mangled-address constructions where apparent pledge can be inflated through stake credential "mangled addresses". Meanwhile, dReps have only a flat registration deposit and no equivalent pledge primitive, limiting future designs that may want dReps to have visible skin in the game.

Reviewer: Could you please define what a "mangled address" actually means?

Author: This is just a Shelley address whose payment and delegation credentials are controlled by different parties.  Also called a "hybrid address" according to [CIP-0019](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0019#delegation-part).

> This CIP replaces declared stake pool pledge with actual locked ADA by making the pool pledge deposit variable and using that deposit as the pool's pledge. Instead of declaring pledge in pool parameters and then checking whether owner stake credentials collectively control enough delegated stake, a pool operator locks the intended pledge amount in the ledger deposit pot. The existing pool deposit parameter is renamed to `minPoolDeposit` and becomes the minimum allowed pool pledge deposit.

Reviewer: We can't rename parameters. It must be a new parameter that is introduced

> The same mechanism is introduced for dReps. The existing dRep deposit parameter is renamed to `minDrepDeposit` and becomes the minimum allowed dRep pledge deposit. A dRep may lock any amount at or above that minimum as dRep pledge. This CIP does not change dRep voting power formulas or define a dRep compensation scheme. It creates a simple, queryable, on-chain pledge primitive that future CIPs may use for dRep incentives, compensation eligibility, concentration mitigation, etc.

Reviewer: Ditto
```suggestion
The same mechanism is introduced for dReps. The existing dRep deposit parameter is deprecated and a new one named `minDRepDeposit` is introduced, which becomes the minimum allowed dRep pledge deposit. A dRep may lock any amount at or above that minimum as dRep pledge. This CIP does not change dRep voting power formulas or define a dRep compensation scheme. It creates a simple, queryable, on-chain pledge primitive that future CIPs may use for dRep incentives, compensation eligibility, concentration mitigation, etc.
```

> Pledged stake remains economically active. Pool pledge deposits continue to earn staking rewards through the pool they pledge to and continue to count toward the dRep chosen by the pool operator's voting delegation. dRep pledge deposits continue to count toward that dRep's voting power and continue to earn staking rewards through the stake pool chosen by the dRep.

Reviewer: This is a massive change to semantics that we have today. Today stake pool deposit does NOT earn staking rewards or participate in governance. Also, because such deposit is not associated with any account address, it cannot be used for delegating to any DRep.
It would be a fairly complex change to stake distribution computation to make the deposit participate in earning staking rewards, and it is even harder task to make it participate in the governance, assuming we would use AccountAddress  associated with the stake pool where stake pool receives rewards as the source of truth for delegation to a DRep.

## Motivation: Why is this CIP necessary?

### Current pool pledge is declared, not locked

Stake pool pledge is currently a value declared in pool registration parameters. At reward calculation time, the ledger checks whether the pool owners collectively control enough stake to satisfy the declared pledge. If the pledge is met, the declared pledge value is used in the reward calculation. If it is not met, the pool receives no rewards for that epoch.

This mechanism has two drawbacks.

> First, pledge is operationally more complex than it needs to be. A pool operator declares a value, ensures enough stake is delegated through pool owner stake credentials, and relies on ledger accounting to classify that stake as owner stake. The deposit required to register the pool is a separate fixed value and does not itself represent the pool's pledge. This also creates common confusion between declared pledge and live pledge.

Reviewer: It is not only operationally complex, but it is also complex from the implementation point of view. However, any time there is a suggestion to replace a complex part of Ledger with something simple we need to remember that we are not replacing, we are adding new logic, because we have to preserve old logic forever. So, from perspective of implementation this becomes even more complex, not simpler.

A simpler solution would be to provide better documentation and tooling that brings clarity to the current system.

> Second, declared pledge is vulnerable to confusing address constructions. CIP-0019 describes Shelley addresses as having a payment part and a delegation part. These parts are usually controlled by the same party, but can be controlled separately in "mangled addresses" or "hybrid addresses". Since current pledge satisfaction follows stake credentials, not payment credentials, ADA controlled by one party's payment credential may still count as another party's pool owner stake if the address uses that pool owner's stake credential. This does not create stake from nowhere and does not double-count stake, but it can inflate apparent pledge without requiring the pool operator to actually lock the claimed amount.

Reviewer: >  it can inflate apparent pledge without requiring the pool operator to actually lock the claimed amount.

A stake pool owner would not risk sending funds to someone else while using a stake credential that belongs to such owner, because such output can be spent by the third party, bringing down the total amount below the declared pledge amount, thus causing stake pool loose all rewards. So, the only sensible thing an SPO can do is to retain control of "Owners" accounts. Note also that "Onwers" cannot be script addressed, which means SPOs cannot use a smart contract to lend those funds to anyone or participate in any other on chain financial processes.

So, IMHO this is a moot point.

> A related long-standing node issue describes "pledge as a service", where pool operators may collect stake keys from third parties and register those credentials as pool owners. This can make pledge collaboration resemble ordinary delegation more than a high-trust owner relationship. This CIP addresses that issue by making pledge depend on ADA locked as a pool pledge deposit rather than on registered owner stake credentials.

Reviewer: I personally see this as a feature that multiple people can collaborate on satisfying pledge for a particular pool. Important point it cannot be done as a service, since actual stake pool owner has to trust those collaborators not to pull the carpet from underneath and reduce the pledge below the declared amount, which again would force the SPO to forfeit the rewards.

It seems like a totally viable approach where N people decide to collaborate on operating a pool. They can create a multi-sig account that uses all of those "owners" credentials for the account where rewards will be deposited to.
Which forces mutual trust: if any one of them misbehaves, none of the collaborators get the rewards.

Author: Fair point.  My goal was to simplify pledge in a way that could better facilitate “pool alliances,” where multiple parties jointly fund and control a pool’s pledge through an appropriate multisig or script arrangement.  But in hindsight, trying to do this via deposit probably makes this worse, not better.

### Deposits already express locked ADA

> The ledger already tracks deposits for stake credentials, stake pools, dReps, and governance actions. Deposits are returned only through the relevant deregistration, retirement, or finalization path. This CIP uses that existing accounting concept for pledge: a pool's pledge is the ADA locked under its pool pledge deposit, and a dRep's pledge is the ADA locked under its dRep pledge deposit.

Reviewer: One more time I'd like to drive the point of the existing mechanism that locks ADA in the deposit, thus making that ADA unable to participate in any other on chain mechanism. That was done by design and is essential for the security of the system as a whole.

- `pledged stake`: ADA locked as a pool or dRep pledge deposit and included in stake and governance accounting according to the rules in this CIP.
- `pledge owner credential`: the stake credential or reward account associated with a pledge deposit for reward and voting-power accounting.

### Protocol parameter migration

This CIP renames the existing deposit protocol parameters:

- `poolDeposit` becomes `minPoolDeposit`.
- `drepDeposit` becomes `minDrepDeposit`.

Their meanings change as follows:

- `minPoolDeposit`: minimum allowed `poolPledgeDeposit`.
- `minDrepDeposit`: minimum allowed `drepPledgeDeposit`.

These parameters no longer define fixed registration deposits. They define the minimum amount of ADA that must remain locked for the corresponding role while that role is registered.

Changing either parameter by governance changes the minimum required pledge for future registration and update certificates. Existing registered pools and dReps with deposits below a newly increased minimum SHOULD remain valid until their next registration update, unless a future hard fork explicitly defines a migration rule that requires top-ups.

### Stake pool registration and updates

> Stake pool registration and update certificates MUST include an explicit `poolPledgeDeposit` amount and a pledge owner credential.

Reviewer: Stake pool registration and update already do include pledge owner key hashes.

We've pondered on adding the actual deposit to the certificate, since it could be useful in other circumstances.
One issue is that such change will have to span two eras, since we cannot make a backwards incompatible change like this on a single HF. We'll have to add new certificates and deprecate the old ones. Similarly to how we handled addition of deposit amount to Account (un)registration certificates.

So, such change would take at least a couple of years from the start of implementation, before it can be relied on

For a newly registered pool:

- The transaction MUST lock a `poolPledgeDeposit` for the pool.
- `poolPledgeDeposit` MUST be greater than or equal to `pp.minPoolDeposit`.
- `poolPledgeDeposit` is recorded in the ledger's deposit accounting under the pool's `PoolDeposit` deposit purpose.
- `poolPledgeDeposit` is the pool's pledge.

> - The pledge owner credential identifies the reward account that receives staking rewards attributable to this pledged ADA and whose voting delegation determines the dRep voting power for this pledged ADA.

Reviewer: Who is the pledge owner actually?
Whenever a deposit is being left upon registration of the pool it is the stake pool operator that pays it. Those funds are not associated with any account, thus it cannot be used for DReps voting power.
However, as I've mentioned in another comment, today there is only one account address that is actually associated with the stake pool, namely where stake pool rewards are deposited, which means that is the only one that can be potentially considered as a pledge owner that has mechanism for delegation to a DRep. If so, then it needs to be explicitly stated.

For an already registered pool:

> - Submitting a pool update certificate MUST NOT require pool retirement or deregistration.

Reviewer: This is already the case, so I don't see a point mentioning it
```suggestion
```

- If the new `poolPledgeDeposit` is greater than the existing `poolPledgeDeposit`, the transaction MUST pay and lock the difference.
- If the new `poolPledgeDeposit` is less than the existing `poolPledgeDeposit`, the transaction MUST refund the difference.
- An update that sets `poolPledgeDeposit` below `pp.minPoolDeposit` MUST be rejected.
- An update that changes the pledge owner credential or any reward or refund destination for `poolPledgeDeposit` MUST be authorized by both the pool cold credential and the affected pledge owner credential.

The pool parameter field for declared pledge is removed. Pledge is no longer read from pool parameters. The sole source of pool pledge is `poolPledgeDeposit` recorded in ledger deposit accounting.

For transition compatibility, an implementation era MAY retain, deprecate, or ignore the existing serialized declared pledge field before removing it completely. Regardless of the transition encoding, ledger semantics after activation MUST treat `poolPledgeDeposit` as the sole source of pool pledge.

### Pool pledge rewards and voting power

A `poolPledgeDeposit` is pledged stake.

For stake-pool accounting:

> - `poolPledgeDeposit` MUST count as stake delegated to the pool that the pledge deposit applies to.

Reviewer: As mentioned before, this is a serious change to how we handle deposits today. Deposit today is explicitly excluded from participating in earning staking rewards or voting, because that is exactly what is meant by a deposit: value is locked for the purpose of securing the system and is unusable for anything else.
